# HTML
Before we start learning to build websites, it would be beneficial to briefly explore (a simplified version of) what goes on 'under the hood' whenever you view a web page.

When you type a web address into your browser's address bar (for the purposes of this example we will use one that should be familiar to most: www.google.com) your browser must first make what is called a DNS lookup. This essentially involves consulting an online address book to find the location of the computer (the server) where the website is stored (hosted). Using this address the browser then makes a request to the server for the page that you want to view.

All being well, the server should respond to this request by sending the page back as a .html file. This .html file contains the content of the page you wish to view and your browser uses this to render the page on your computer (displaying it on the screen for many users, but also reading it out for those who are blind or have a visual impairment).

To build websites, therefore, we need to create them in the format that browsers can understand: HTML.

HTML stands for Hyper-Text Markup Language. Hyper-Text is essentially techno-geek speak for documents that link to other documents. To return to the example of www.google.com, when you make a search on google it scans the web for pages that might match the words you are looking for, and presents them as a list of links sorted by what it feels are the most relevant. Selecting any of these links will take you to that page so you can continue your search. It would probably not be exaggerating things much to say that links between documents are the single thing that contributes the most to the usefulness of the internet.

To continue on with our breakdown of HTML you will notice that the L stands for language. In this case we are not referring to a language like English, Chinese, or Arabic, that is used by people to communicate with on another, but instead what is know as a computer language; which allows people to communicate with computers.

Fundamentally, computers deal in binary, familiar to most as longs string of 0s and 1s like this: 011001100. Having to use binary everytime we want to tell a computer to do something would obviously become very tedious and error prone, so very clever people have invented a whole series of languages which are closer to those you would use in everyday life and which we can use to write instructions that the computer will then convert to binary before it follows them. There are a whole host of different computer languages for different use cases, and HTML is the one we use for describing websites.

That, then, just leaves us with Markup. Markup describes the fact that HTML is a language for marking up documents; annotating parts of them to give them additional meaning. These annotations are what allow the browser to determine whether a particular part of the page is a piece of text or an image (along with a whole host of other possibilities) and serve as the instructions for how to build the page.

In the next chapter we will start to look at how html documents are formed.