# Basic page structure

In this chapter we're going to begin work on the initial html structure of our first website. Typing out the required elements of a page every time you start a new project can become quite tedious and error prone, fortunately, we already created a minimal page that we can use as a starting point in Chapter 3. First things first then, copy `hello_world.html` into a new folder that will contain all the files for our current project<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup> and rename it to `index.html`.

## Website file structure
The reason that we are renaming the file is that, when you come to actually upload your website to the web, the server that hosts it will need to locate which file it should serve to visitors when they request a particular page. The convention is generally to have each page in its own folder, with the structure of the folders mirroring that of the pages on the website<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>. When the server comes to look in the appropriate folder for a particular page, it will first look for a file called `index.html`, so we're just making its job as easy as possible.

Once you have copied and renamed the file, the next step is to open it in a text editor and remove the `<h1>` element from the `<body>`, so that it looks something like this.
```
<!doctype html>

<html lang="en">

<head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">

    <title>My website</title>
</head>

<body>
</body>

</html>
```

This is about the minimum information a browser needs to properly load and render a page and we will expand upon this by adding all of the elements for this page into the empty `body`.

## \<header\>

The first thing we are going to add to the page is a `header` element. Add the following lines<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup> right after the end of the opening `body` tag:
```
<header>
    <h1>Hello, I'm Catwaladr Caractapus.</h1>
    <p>
        I'm the king of the Catuvellauni and passionate about string, mice, boxes, and other such important
        things. This page details my achievements, so all may bask in my glory.
    </p>
</header>
```
The `header` element serves as a container for introductory content about the page, such as the page's title, date it was created, the author, brand image etc. In this case we have added the page title as a `h1` and a short introductory paragraph contained in the `p` element.

### Footnotes
<ol class="footnotes">
<li id="f1">Mine is called website_1_final, but you probably want to name it something a bit more friendly such as 'My Portfolio' for something similar.</li>
<li id="f2">e.g. the homepage of a website called example.com would be a file called index.html in a folder named example.com. The contact page would also be called index.html, but would be located in a sub-folder of example.com named contact.</li>
<li id="f3">I will be using dummy content for this project just to show you how the website would look were you to make a similar site for yourself. Please do replace the text and images here with something appropriate to yourself, that way your first ever website might have some additional utility beyond being merely a learning aid.</li>
</ol>